Adds Tyk API Gateway blog post (#3431)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/blog/2023/tyk-api-gateway/index.md

---
title: Tyk API Gateway's Native OpenTelemetry Integration
linkTitle: Tyk API Gateway's Native OpenTelemetry Integration

> date: 2023-10-24

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: 2023-11-01
```

author: >-
  [Sonja Chevre](https://github.com/SonjaChevre) (Tyk Technologies)

> draft: false

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

---

> {{% alert color="primary" %}}

Reviewer: The alert should probably have a title. How about something like "OTel community note" or "Integrations welcome"?

> As part of [OpenTelemetry's vision](http://localhost:1313/community/mission/#telemetry-should-be-built-in),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As part of [OpenTelemetry's vision](/community/mission/#telemetry-should-be-built-in),
```

we believe that high-quality telemetry can be built in to the entire

> software stack. Therefore we are excited, that there are more and more
> [libraries, services and apps, that integrate OpenTelemetry](/ecosystem/integrations/)
> to provide built in observability to their users._

Reviewer: ```suggestion
software stack. We are excited that more and more
[libraries, services, and apps are integrating with OpenTelemetry](/ecosystem/integrations/)
to provide built-in observability to their users.
```

> _In this and future blog post, we will spot light these integrations to you! If
> you want your integration to be listed and to be highlighted in a blog post as
> well,
> [reach out](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/issues/new)!_
> {{% /alert %}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this and future blog posts, we will spot light such integrations. If
you want your integration to be listed and to be highlighted in a blog post as
well,
[reach out](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/issues/new)!

{{% /alert %}}
```

> {{% alert color="primary" %}}
> As part of [OpenTelemetry's vision](http://localhost:1313/community/mission/#telemetry-should-be-built-in),
> we believe that high-quality telemetry can be built in to the entire
> software stack. Therefore we are excited, that there are more and more
> [libraries, services and apps, that integrate OpenTelemetry](/ecosystem/integrations/)
> to provide built in observability to their users._
> 
> _In this and future blog post, we will spot light these integrations to you! If
> you want your integration to be listed and to be highlighted in a blog post as
> well,
> [reach out](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/issues/new)!_
> {{% /alert %}}

Reviewer: You'll need to rebase in order for the following shortcode to be defined:

```suggestion
{{< blog/integration-badge >}}
```

> 

Reviewer 2: @SonjaChevre @austinlparker @cartersocha PTAL!

Author: looks good from my side!

Small editing suggestion for the first sentence:

instead of

> It is part of
[OpenTelemetry's vision](http://localhost:1313/community/mission/#telemetry-should-be-built-in),
that we believe that 

> As part of [OpenTelemetry's vision](http://localhost:1313/community/mission/#telemetry-should-be-built-in), we believe that

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{{% alert color="primary" %}}
As part of [OpenTelemetry's vision](http://localhost:1313/community/mission/#telemetry-should-be-built-in),
we believe that high-quality telemetry can be built in to the entire
software stack. Therefore we are excited, that there are more and more
[libraries, services and apps, that integrate OpenTelemetry](/ecosystem/integrations/)
to provide built in observability to their users._

_In this and future blog post, we will spot light these integrations to you! If
you want your integration to be listed and to be highlighted in a blog post as
well,
[reach out](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/issues/new)!_
{{% /alert %}}

```

Reviewer 2: thanks @SonjaChevre, updated :-)

Reviewer 3: "In this and future blog post(s), we will spot light these integrations." 
"to be listed and highlighted" (maybe my grammar is off here but seems repetitive as is
- minor nits

Reviewer: @cartersocha @svrnm et al.: how about a **flashy badge** instead of a note? See the following proposal:

- #3485

Reviewer 2: superseded by https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/pull/3431#discussion_r1383549296

substantial engineering resources. OpenTelemetry streamlines this process,
enabling a more efficient and standardized approach to collecting and exporting
telemetry data. As a result, our users gain the flexibility to transmit their
telemetry data to an even broader array of
[observability tools and vendors](/ecosystem/vendors/).

We have now deprecated our support for OpenTracing in favor of OpenTelemetry for
distributed tracing and plan to leverage OpenTelemetry to streamline the export
of metrics and logs in the future.

## How to Integrate Tyk with OpenTelemetry

Starting with version 5.2,
[Tyk API Gateway has native support for OpenTelemetry distributed tracing](https://tyk.io/docs/product-stack/tyk-gateway/advanced-configurations/distributed-tracing/open-telemetry/open-telemetry-overview/).
Here is how to configure it, enable detailed tracing per API and instrumenting
custom plugins.

### Enable OpenTelemetry at Gateway Level

Edit Tyk Gateway configuration file to enable OpenTelemetry support, like this:

```json
{
  "opentelemetry": {
    "enabled": true
  }
}
```

You can also enable OpenTelemetry by setting the corresponding environment

> variable: TYK_GW_OPENTELEMETRY_ENABLED=TRUE.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
variable: `TYK_GW_OPENTELEMETRY_ENABLED=TRUE`.
```

We have now deprecated our support for OpenTracing in favor of OpenTelemetry for distributed tracing and plan to leverage OpenTelemetry to streamline the export of metrics and logs in the future.

## How to Integrate Tyk with OpenTelemetry

Starting with version 5.2, [Tyk API Gateway has native support for OpenTelemetry distributed tracing](https://tyk.io/docs/product-stack/tyk-gateway/advanced-configurations/distributed-tracing/open-telemetry/open-telemetry-overview/). Here is how to configure it, enable detailed tracing per API and instrumenting custom plugins.

### Enable OpenTelemetry at Gateway Level

Edit Tyk Gateway configuration file to enable OpenTelemetry support, like this:

{
  "opentelemetry": {
    "enabled": true
  }

> }

Reviewer 2: ~~~suggestion
```json
{
  "opentelemetry": {
    "enabled": true
  }
}
```
~~~

You can also enable OpenTelemetry by setting the corresponding environment variable: TYK_GW_OPENTELEMETRY_ENABLED=TRUE.

> By default, OpenTelemetry spans are exported using the gRPC protocol to localhost:4317. For more configuration options and default values, refer to the [documentation](https://tyk.io/docs/tyk-oss-gateway/configuration/#opentelemetry).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By default, OpenTelemetry spans are exported using the gRPC protocol to `localhost:4317`. For more configuration options and default values, refer to the [documentation](https://tyk.io/docs/tyk-oss-gateway/configuration/#opentelemetry).
```

Tyk will export two spans: one for the total duration of the API call and one span for the call to the upstream service, as shown in the following screenshot from Jaeger. 

![Typ API Gateway distributed trace](tyk-api-gateway-opentelemetry-trace.png)

### Detailed tracing per APIs

> Upon enabling OpenTelemetry at the gateway level, you gain the flexibility to activate detailed tracing for particular APIs. To do so, simply adjust the corresponding API definition and toggle the 'detailed_tracing' option to either 'true' or 'false.' The default value for this setting is 'false.'
> With this configuration, Tyk will generate a span for every middleware operation carried out throughout the API request/response lifecycle. This includes actions like API version validation, authentication, authorization, rate limiting, and request and response transformation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Upon enabling OpenTelemetry at the gateway level, you gain the flexibility to activate detailed tracing for particular APIs. To do so, simply adjust the corresponding API definition and toggle the `detailed_tracing` option to either `true` or `false`. The default value for this setting is `false`.
With this configuration, Tyk will generate a span for every middleware operation carried out throughout the API request/response lifecycle. This includes actions like API version validation, authentication, authorization, rate limiting, and request and response transformation.
```

Here you can quickly spot an issue reported by the rate limiting middleware: 

![Typ API Gateway distributed trace with middleware details](tyk-api-gateway-opentelemetry-trace-detail.png)

### Instrumenting custom plugins with OpenTelemetry

Tyk supports the use of custom plugins (also called custom middleware) to extend its functionality, making it a highly flexible and customizable API gateway solution. This extensibility allows developers to tailor Tyk to their specific needs, whether it's for enhancing security, adding new authentication methods, integrating with third-party services, or implementing custom request/response transformations.

By instrumenting custom plugins with OpenTelemetry SDK or Tyk’s OpenTelemetry library implementation (wrapper of the OpenTelemetry SDK that all Tyk components are sharing for convenience), Tyk users can gain additional insights into their custom plugin behaviour for better monitoring and quicker troubleshooting. More information in Tyk’s documentation: [OpenTelemetry Instrumentation in Go Plugins](https://tyk.io/docs/product-stack/tyk-gateway/advanced-configurations/plugins/otel-plugins/). 

## What's next?

> Now that the [first stable release of OTel Go metric SDK has been announced](https://opentelemetry.io/blog/2023/otel-go-metrics-sdk-stable/), we will be investigating support for OpenTelemetry metrics. Stay tuned for updates and don't hesitate to reach out with any feedback.

Reviewer 2: Provide a link where people can provide feedback (e.g. github issues?)

Author: done - have added the link to our community.
